Add pgroll 0.7.0 post (#327)
xataio/mdx-blog: whats-new-in-pgroll-0-7-0.mdx

---
title: pgroll 0.7.0 update

> description: Learn about the latest changes in pgroll in the 0.7.0 release as we continue to build and turn it into a first-class open-source schema migration tool for Postgres.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about the latest changes in pgroll in the 0.7.0 release as we continue developing it into a leading open-source schema migration tool for Postgres.
```

image:
  src: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgroll-update-0-6-0@2x.jpg
  alt: pgroll
author: Andrew Farries
authorEmail: andrew@xata.io

> date: 10-22-2024

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 10-23-2024
```

> date: 10-17-2024

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 10-22-2024
```

tags: ['open-source', 'postgres', 'schema', 'migrations', 'pgroll', 'fpSchemaMigrations', 'oss']
published: true
slug: pgroll-0-7-0-update
ogImage: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/xataio/mdx-blog/main/images/pgroll-update-0-6-0@2x.jpg
---

> [pgroll](https://xata.io/pgroll) is Xata's open-source schema migration tool for Postgres. The feature that sets it apart from other migration tools is its ability to perform multi-version schema migrations using the expand/contract pattern: while a migration is in progress, `pgroll` is able to present two versions of your database schema to client applications - the old version and the new. This means that client applications that depend on the old version of the database schema continue to function while the migration is in progress, making application deployments much simpler. Gone are the days of having to perform [complicated multi-step workflows](https://planetscale.com/docs/learn/handling-table-and-column-renames#how-to-rename-a-column-on-planetscale) to do simple schema changes without breaking clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn about the latest changes in [pgroll](https://xata.io/pgroll) in the 0.7.0 release as we continue to build it into a first-class open-source schema migration tool for Postgres.
```

`pgroll` is open-source under the Apache-2.0 license and developed in the open on [GitHub](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll).

> We released [pgroll 0.1.0](https://xata.io/blog/pgroll-schema-migrations-postgres) in October 2023. Since then we've made [nine further releases](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/releases) as we continue to build `pgroll` and turn it into a first-class open-source schema migration tool for Postgres.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the last pgroll [0.6.0 release](https://xata.io/blog/pgroll-0-6-0-update) in July 2024, we've introduced key updates aimed at solving common database migration challenges. Support for Postgres 17 ensures compatibility with the latest version, while improvements to backfill performance—now up to 80% faster—reduce downtime during large schema changes. Configurable batch sizes and delays offer developers more control over the migration process, optimizing performance and minimizing impact on their Postgres database. These enhancements make migrations faster, safer, and more efficient, especially for complex or large datasets. 
```

## What's new in pgroll v0.7.0

> The previous version of `pgroll`, `v0.6.0`, was released in May 2024. It's seen steady development since May with 31 pull requests merged in that time. Happily, this release also includes work from six first time contributors! We're building `pgroll` in the open and we're always happy to see people getting involved on the issue tracker and through pull requests.

Reviewer 2: May conflicts with the July timeframe mentioned in the previous paragraph. Which one is correct?

The performance improvement was achieved by reducing the work done by the 'up' trigger that constitutes the 'inner loop' during a backfill. [#389](https://github.com/xataio/pgroll/pull/389) has all the details if you're curious.

### Configurable backfill batch size

Another important backfill-related change that went into `v0.7.0` is the ability to configure the batch size for backfills. In previous versions of `pgroll` backfills were batched, processing each batch of 1000 records in a separate transaction in order to minimize the duration for which locks were held on the rows in the table.

In `pgroll` `v0.7.0` the same batched behaviour still applies but the batch size can be tuned through the `--backfill-batch-size` command line flag or the `PGROLL_BACKFILL_BATCH_SIZE` environment variable. For tables where row locks during migration start are less of a concern, for example append-only tables with few row `UPDATE`s, increasing the batch size can improve performance of the backfill by requiring fewer transactions and fewer round trips to the database.

### Configurable backfill delays

> Again with the backfills, `pgroll` `v0.7.0` adds the ability to configure a delay between backfill batches. Previous versions of `pgroll` would always attempt to backfill batches as fast as possible, with no delay between each batch. `pgroll` `v0.7.0` adds the ability to introduce a delay between batch by using the `--backfill-batch-delay` command line flag or the `PGROLL_BACKFILL_BATCH_DELAY` environment variable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Again with the backfills, `pgroll` `v0.7.0` adds the ability to configure a delay between backfill batches. Previous versions of `pgroll` would always attempt to backfill batches as fast as possible, with no delay between each batch. `pgroll` `v0.7.0` adds the ability to introduce a delay between batches by using the `--backfill-batch-delay` command line flag or the `PGROLL_BACKFILL_BATCH_DELAY` environment variable.
```
